Then I'll pass over to Kate.
So, um, Miranda Koto.
My name's Jason Hewitt, manager of Performance Audits.
Um, joined here today, um, by Kate Williams,
the audit lead for this piece of work.
Um, and, uh, clin, uh,
audit director from Audit New Zealand.
So I'll, that's, that's my part
so far. So I'll pass you on to Kate.
Thanks, Jason. Yeah, so I'm just gonna talk a bit about,
um, why we did this audit, what we found,
and then we can move on to any questions that you've got.
Sure. Um, we did this audit
because vehicle safety is important.
Um, if you've got a car, you'll know about getting a warrant
of fitness, but even if you don't have a car, you know,
you use our roads, you might go on the bus, you might bike.
So you wanna know that the vehicles on our roads are safe.
We looked at this audit, or for this audit, we looked at
how well, um, NZTA regulates the vehicle inspectors
and inspecting organizations that carry out warrants
and certificates of fitness.
We looked at how they, how they appoint inspectors.
We looked at how they detect and respond to non-compliance.
So when they're not doing the job properly,
and we looked at how they, um, monitor
and report on the work that they do.
Back in 2018,
a car passenger died when their seatbelt
failed in an accident.
The, um, the car had been recently checked
and given a warrant of fitness,
but it turned out that, um,
the car had not been inspected properly.
As a result of this. NZTA carried out some, um,
investigations and found that they had
what they called a regulatory failure in terms
of the warrant and certificates of fitness.
They found there were, I think about 850 cases
of non-compliance that they hadn't followed up,
and about 150 of those, they deemed to be,
um, high priority.
So after that, there were some reviews, a lot
of changes were made, and,
and we came in, um, some years after that to do the audit.
What we found was that NCTA now has much better processes in
place to detect non-compliance and to respond quickly
and consistently when they find non-compliance.
And that was a, you know, a very good finding.
But we did find some areas that they also need to improve.
So one of those is around it.
Um, the regulation and warrants
and certificates of fitness still uses a lot of quite, um,
outdated IT systems.
So the main database that they use, um, for the,
for the inspections, there's an old access database.
A lot of their work is based on the spreadsheets
for tracking their work and things like that.
We also found that the vehicle standards themselves could be
easier to find and understand,
and we thought that there could be clearer links
between the work or,
or the impact of warrant certificates of fitness
and the impact that has on overall road safety,
because without those links, it makes it hard to see
what the impact of that work is.
We also talked a bit about the future.
So with a warrant or certificate of fitness at the moment,
they take a vehicle and they do pretty
much a physical check of it.
You know, they sound the horn, they test the brakes,
they have a look to see if there's any
rust on the undercarriage.
But more and more cars now have got very modern, um,
safety features, which are based on advanced technology.
And those things aren't looked at in a
warrant or certificate of fitness.
And at the moment, you know,
nobody's really looking at that.
So that's something that needs
to be dealt with in the future.
NZTA and the Ministry of Transport are aware of that,
and there is work starting, they're starting to think about,
um, what that might look like
and how we might have assurance about
vehicle safety in the future.
Just for the committee, um,
there's a few things the committee might think about.
As a result of this audit, we made five recommendations
and our report, the committee might like to ask NZTA, um,
to come in and talk about their progress, um,
against those recommendations
for the work being done about the future
of vehicle safety testing.
The Ministry of Transport might be better
placed to talk about that work.
Um, also some of our findings might apply
to other regulators like maritime, um, maritime New Zealand.
Um, there might be questions for those regulators such as
how are they using data
and analytics to support their work, um,
whether they have got clear outcomes
and can see what the outcomes are from their regulatory work
and you know, what they're doing about looking to the future
to see how things might need to change
as technology changes.
So thank you. We're happy
to answer any questions that you've got. Thanks, Kate.
Um, Dan, you had fir you were first up.
Oh yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, really good.
Interesting report. Uh, thank you.
Um, was this, I'm just quite kinda understand in terms
of why you chose this area.
Was it, um, did you have inquiries in your office to,
to look at this or,
Um, there wasn't any particular trigger?
Um, yeah, it was just an area that we thought was,
was important, something that we hadn't looked at before.
Yeah. Fantastic. The other thing is, um,
I heard you talk about technology
and definitely like modern cars these days.
Mm-hmm. Just more like, um, modern lap laptops on wheels.
So, um, you know, I know my two vehicles have a lot of tech
that just regulates even the,
the handbrake now is electronic rather than physical.
Mm-hmm. So how do, how do inspectors build that into
their regime?
Um, you know that we are moving
to basically electronics controlling most
of Yeah. The car system.
So there's, there's a couple of things there.
So if it's a, um, an electronic thing
that's replacing an existing feature,
then I think they would test it
to some extent if it functions in the same way.
So one of the examples that they talked to us about was
how some cars, um,
now rather than having mirrors, they have cameras.
And this was a bit of a problem to start with
because the regulations were very rigid
and said they needed to have a mirror.
And they've now had to change that to say they need
to have a mirror or something that does the same job
as a mirror that can see behind the car.
So they can change the regulations to some extent,
but they don't go as far
as testing the actual hardware or software of it.
They just would check that you can see behind the vehicle.
But where there are, are new features like, you know,
lane keep assist or something like that, that is not checked
as part of a, a warrant of fitness. Mm.
Which would be concerned given sooner
or later those might start having faults and
Yeah. And there's more and
more vehicles have them,
it's gonna be more and more of a, of an issue.
Yes. And so that's why, you know, the Ministry
of Transport is already looking into that.
And in terms of legislative change, I mean,
I guess we've got clunky old, older legislation of,
did your organization come up
with any recommendations on the legislative front or,
I think the main recommendation was
around just really making, um, it easier
to change the leg legislation.
Mm-hmm. So, you know, um, even a quite a minor change,
because the regulations are secondary legislation,
there is a process to go through
and so NZTA can't necessarily just make a change
that makes sense easily without going
through a full legislative process for
that secondary legislation.
Yeah, correct. Thank you. So can I just supplement you?
I'm sorry. So is that, um,
so you reckon the current checklist, you know,
when you do well, it's not fit for purpose anymore.
Like there's certain things need
to be add on to be checked as well.
I don't know whether say it's fit for purpose
or not, it's not really our role to say, say
what our inspection should cover.
I think we are just saying that it doesn't cover those
things, and that's a challenge that needs to be considered,
um, by the policy makers to think about, well, what,
what is the purpose of these inspections?
What do they need to cover? And then
how, how do you address that?
Um, I think, you know, the way that, um,
inspections are done at the moment
and the workforce that does inspections at the moment
is not necessarily the right, right.
Workforce with the right skillset to go
and start testing advanced technologies,
a whole different approach might be needed.
So it's quite a major piece of work that's going to need
to be done to look at those advanced technologies
and how we get that assurance,
and then also who's responsible for, for that.
Sure. Thank you. Can I, Camilla,
You go first, Um, just a recommendation five.
Um, and I understand about technologies changing,
but you've kind of recommended there that, um,
that the inspection requirements are easier to change.
Do you think that that's too permissive in terms of, uh,
relying on technology changes being sufficient
to meet safety requirements when perhaps they might not be,
uh, as, as people have said, they might have faults
or errors or there might be things
that that come up in the future.
Um, and do you think change is the right word,
or do you think modify
Is it might maybe modify?
Yeah, so we are not really talking about the major changes.
Um, so at the moment there are, you know, there's a rule
for each part of the vehicle, um,
and it just specifies it's quite functional, um, about
what it needs, what it needs to do,
what they need to be able to do.
Um, but sometimes maybe that doesn't work
or there's a bit of a change
that means it just doesn't quite make sense.
And at the moment, that's quite hard to change,
but I think for a more, um, for a more substantive change,
then a whole different approach might be needed anyway.
Yeah. Thanks. Can I have
Yeah, go on. Yeah,
sure. Uh,
I didn't actually receive the report,
so if something already written,
don't just apologize for that.
Do you guys actually look into, um, people
who don't actually do the inspection as well,
but you know, some cars may,
after they passed the wharf, like for almost one
or two years, they, they still not registered or, or,
or be doing the inspection.
Do you actually look into that, the area as well?
So for this audit, no, we didn't look at that.
So we just looked at how well the people
that carry out the WFS and calfs are doing the Agile,
but we didn't look at, um, how well the regulation
of vehicle owners, if you like,
we didn't look at that side of it.
Yeah.
Did did you have in the, in the process of doing this,
and we just had a few questions about vehicle technology
and the way that that changes, did you need
to understand in any way that the way in which
that vehicle technology is changing the testing processes
they go through as manufacturers?
The lot, the, the longevity of the, the technology
that's the, particularly the safety
technology that's in the cars.
Um, we didn't look at that in a lot of detail. No.
I mean, it was mentioned to us, um, in passing in some
of our conversations, but it wasn't really within the scope
of the order to look at that.
So do you think that
as NZT slash MOT are looking at the way in which they might,
uh, respond to this, um, they ought to be considering that
what, what technology actually is capable of
and what its limitations might be?
Um, I think we'd expect them to look at, you know,
all aspects of the technology, um,
or any, anything that's relevant.
Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Cool.
Um, and see the other area you,
'cause this, this really is about the inspecting,
I would say inspecting the inspectors in a way, isn't it?
Yeah. Yeah. So the capability of the inspectors mm-hmm.
Your view is, I mean, clearly there were some
who were deficient, end of story.
Um, that's, so when we, when we were talking about 850, um,
cases, non-compliance, that's 850 individual cases,
which might be one, one entity doing it eight wrong,
850 times could be.
Yeah. Or eight 50 to what doing it mm-hmm.
One time, whatever it might be. So it's a, it's a,
it's a number of, um, what, um,
what, what was I gonna ask?
What, what you you're basically saying is, are NZTA now
as the regulator there in your view now on top of that, so
that the, the industry is actually delivering more the
fitnesses in a way that it should be doing.
It's doing the inspections properly,
it's not letting things through the gate.
Yeah. Are you reasonably comfortable with that now?
Yeah, so we're reasonably reasonably comfortable
that now they've got processes in place to do that.
So, you know, it's a human system.
People inspecting vehicles,
there's always gonna be some problems you can't guarantee
there'll never be any, any problems,
but they've got a lot of processes in place.
Um, so one of the examples
that they do is use data analysis.
So they look at, um, you know,
they'll look at any individuals
or inspecting organizations
that have got higher than average pass rates
or fail rates, so they can sort
of see if there's any anomalies with those
and look into those in more detail.
Um, from when they do find problems,
they've now just got much stricter processes in place.
So all the inspectors have the same, um, all
of the NZTA inspectors have the same process to follow a lot
of guidance, but, you know, if you find these sorts
of errors, this is how we're gonna respond,
this is the sort of letter you need to send.
So it's a lot more consistent.
And they've got processes internally
where the more serious cases of non-compliance get dealt,
dealt with by a panel,
The non-compliance of the Inspectors of the inspector.
So if someone's not inspecting a vehicle
properly. Yeah. Yeah.
And just the other thing is we, we can, we can veer from,
in New Zealand or many other jurisdictions,
we can veer from being a bit laissez fair to being
so hard on the regulations that we fail.
An enormous number of people doesn't matter whether it's,
whether it's a building or whether it's a car
or whether it's whatever it might be.
Um, but we gotta make sure we got the balance.
In other words, we can say we're gonna make it so, so tight,
the cars which are perfectly good,
or vehicles which are perfectly good, actually, we,
we've essentially we're failing them
and we make, we're adding cost, et cetera, to the system.
Are you confident that we've got that from what you've seen?
That we've we are not, we're not varying from,
we had a problem to going right the other way
and saying, actually we're gonna create a problem in the
opposite direction, be regularly safe,
but we're also economically very, very expensive.
And a lot of people go, oh, you know,
it's, it's very expensive.
Cost of living and all that sort
of thing. Very difficult for people.
So in terms of the requirements
for the vehicles themselves, that's not something
that we looked at.
Um, but it is something, you know, the sorts of things
that we would expect, um, ministry of Transport
to be considering when it's looking to the future, you know,
how the burden, the costs, um, and,
and getting that, getting the regulatory
settings on the vehicles.
Correct. Now what we were looking at was the, um,
inspectors, as you said, I inspecting the inspectors
and the way NZTA does that now they've got a, um, sort
of graded system.
So depending on, you know, if they see non-compliance
and it's quite minor, they might just
write them a letter saying, this is what you need to fix,
or that we might come back in a couple of weeks
and check you fixed it right up to, um, you know,
removing someone's authority to carry out inspections.
If it's something more serious
Yeah. That, but that the inspect
as opposed to
what the inspectors are doing, then downstream to the people
who are actually bringing their vehicles in.
Yes. Yeah. Okay.
Um, so anybody else wanna pick up a question mate
before I go and do another one? Carlos?
Yes. I just saw on your report, you, um,
you mentioned NCTA got a safer vehicle team mm-hmm.
Managing the regulation of the vehicle inspector
and I inspecting organization.
Mm-hmm. Like how, how, how many people's there to, to,
to do the regular check for all this, um,
organizational inspector,
Um, just trying to remember the number.
So they've got, um, they've got I think four regional teams
and there's maybe up to 10 people in each of those.
But we, so we just looked at the
warrants and certificates of fitness.
The Safer Vehicles team also does other types
of vehicle inspections, so entry inspection of new vehicles
or imported vehicles.
Um, also sort of modifications.
So those teams are not just doing the
warrants and certificates of fitness.
Um, but what they do now is for, for the vehicle inspectors
and inspector organizations, they're on a three yearly cycle
of, um, NZTA coming and checking them.
So it's, rather than a numbers thing, it's,
it's a time thing of
how frequently they'll come and look at them.
And they're pretty much on top of
that three yearly cycle now.
Mm-hmm. Um, if there has been a case
of non-compliance in the past, that might be,
they might come back and look at
them more quickly than that.
So that, that can be one
of the concern if you only got 10 people,
but you got what, 3,600 organization of,
of 12,000 inspector there.
So it's very hard to keep the standard consistent or, or,
or keep a, a standard for everyone.
Um, I mean the, the, when they go
and do a site inspection, we actually went along on a couple
of them to see, to see what they do.
So they have got quite a fixed process that they follow.
Um, everyone has, all the NZTA inspectors have
to follow the same process.
So for example, with, uh, when they go
and check, um, a vehicle inspector,
they give them a theory test,
and then they'll watch them do a complete vehicle inspection
to see how well they're doing it
with the inspecting organization.
It's more about looking at the records that they're keeping.
And so they look at those in, in quite a lot of detail.
So that inspection might take, you know,
if you do one inspector
and inspecting organization at the same time,
probably takes about half a day.
Mm-hmm. Um, I don't think we had any concerns
that they weren't doing those to the required standard.
There were some, um, challenges, particularly in Auckland
for NZTA to keep up with the demand there.
Um, they had a sort of bit more of a backlog in Auckland,
but they were taking some,
some steps to try and address that.
So one of the things was they were taking people from some
of the other regions and just supplementing the Auckland
staff, um, to try and, um, build that up.
And one of the other things they were starting to do,
so at the moment, everyone who works on the NZTA side has
to be an experienced vehicle inspector,
but some of the work, especially
for inspector organizations, is looking at paperwork, um,
whether it complies, you don't need
to be a mechanic to do that.
So they're looking at getting other people to do some of
that part of the work so that the people
with the mechanical expertise can just focus
on, on that side of it.
Can I ask more? The, the reason I'm asking that,
because I think there's a major concern from,
from the general topics that, you know, different garage
or different repair, they have different standard,
if I bring the same car mm-hmm.
I may pass on, on, on, on shop A, but I fail on B
and C, like, so that,
that actually bring another concern is whether those report
are truly reflect the, the, the car status
or the safety, um, the safety of the car as well.
So how, how, how can we adjust that
and how can also we, um, PFA, like a lot of people tell me
that they, they don't want to go to do the wharf
because every single time they go there,
the mechanic will find something they they want to fix.
How can we PFA those, uh, is there anything you,
you find out is unnecessary repair, uh, uh, being mm-hmm.
You know, implement during those, um,
inspection process as well?
So apart from the regular, the regular visits
that NZTA does,
the main thing was the data analysis, um, that we talked about.
So, you know, they see a, a, a particular individual
or inspecting organization that's got a higher, um,
fail rate or even a higher pass rate than the average,
they would look into that to see if there's a pattern.
Mm-hmm. Um, that suggests, you know, suggests that perhaps,
um, they are failing at planning someone too often, um,
or on things un unnecessarily.
I think, you know, as, as a vehicle owner, as a consumer,
you've got the right to shop around if you're not happy, um,
with the service that you're getting when you go
and get a warrant of fitness, you can,
you can go somewhere else.
You can also, um, make a complaint, um,
to the garage directly.
A lot of vehicle inspectors, um, are part
of a wider organization.
So some are members of MTA, the Motor Trades Association,
others are you vehicle testing organizations.
So there's a bigger, um, organization that you can complain
to, and ultimately you can also make a complaint to NZTA
and if they think there's grounds
for complaint, they'll look into that.
Cool. Just following
Up on that. So,
so what you're saying is
that the NZTA inspectors are members of,
so a a they're all sort of, they're qualified in,
in the field, obviously
they, so they know what they're doing.
Um, they're, they're members of various different, um,
Organizations. No.
So the NNTA people just work for NZTA,
so they're independent,
but if as you, if you go to the garage,
the garage is probably the, and a member of some,
So my question there was, um, are you happy that NZ TA's,
people are keeping their skills up to scratch?
In other words, they know what they're doing,
particularly as vehicles evolve.
Mm-hmm. So the NZT inspectors are knowing
what they're supposed to be looking for
and that they're doing a, a fair and reasonable job.
Yeah. We didn't look at that in a lot of detail,
but, um, yeah, we didn't see any concerns about, um,
about the skills of the NZTA people.
So you, we didn't see any concerns Yeah. With that. Yeah.
So if we were talking to NZTA, that'd be something.
So how not have you got a problem,
but how do you make sure that your, um,
your team are kept up to up speed, especially
as cars keep changing or vehicles keep
Track? I, I think the bigger problem
that we heard about was
that there's actually a shortage of people
with the inspection skills.
So both working in the industry
and then that ma there's a challenge for NZTA
to recruit enough people.
Um, so there's a lot of, um, a lot
of inspectors now coming from overseas
because they've had to, um, you know,
there's just not enough people in New Zealand
with the skills and wanting to do that role.
That's interesting. Mm-hmm.
Um, the other question is just we,
we touched a little bit on,
on emerging technologies and how those are dealt with.
Mm-hmm. Um, so can you sort of walk us
through a little bit more what needs to be done in terms
of regulation slash legislation?
Obviously there are two diff quite different things, um, uh,
to respond to those changes.
Mm-hmm.
So, I mean, it's not the role of of our office
to really say what, what should be done,
but I think the challenge that's ahead is that, you know,
as I said, at the moment, it's a physical inspection.
Someone does it, it's, it's fairly straightforward.
The challenge going forward is something quite different.
You've got all these vehicle manufacturers
with probably great big, um, teams of software developers
who are constantly changing, um, so, and updating software,
and it's really not feasible for our government department
to be keeping up with all those changes.
So the whole model of how we do
and how we, um, regulate
for vehicle safety may need to change.
Um, so it's not something that's straightforward,
but that's, um, the challenge really
for the Ministry of Transport to deal with.
Yeah. That, and that's why I asked the question about
whether you'd have any engagement
with the vehicle manufacturers factor
because No, some of that stuff I, I, I just,
I just had the pleasure of being down the,
the winter testing mm-hmm.
Um, environment down south
and um, you know, that is a large part.
It's about software. Mm-hmm.
It's not about hardware, it's about software keeping
vehicles on, on the road
and keeping them straight and so on.
So, but you wouldn't be able to,
most inspectors would've no show
No. Of being able to work,
so that
that's the challenge that they've got. Yeah.
Yeah. Good. Thanks Mr. Chair.
Um, trends overseas in terms of
how this industry may look in 20 years time?
Like do, going back to your point, I mean,
we've got an electric vehicle
and the manufacturer provides updates remotely.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Um, so I guess the question is do we get
to a point where actually, um, you know, they're
so autonomous, um, tech enabled that, that, um,
inspections could almost happen remotely, you know,
to identify okay, what are the weak areas of the vehicle?
Mm-hmm. Like, do is think that
that is something other jurisdiction looking at?
Or, or is this kind of pie the sky science fiction?
Um, again, I think it's probably we, not for us to say
what that might look like, but I, I guess
that is a possibility that that might be one of the ways
that, you know, you get
that assurance about vehicle safety in the future.
Yeah. You know, making sure that you are, you know,
at the moment no one checks
that your vehicle has had the software
updates that it needs. Mm-hmm.
Um, but I mean there's, what I guess I'm getting at is
we've got physical,
our industry at the moment is based on physical
people that check everything.
Yeah. I guess the question is, uh, is there ever a moment
where potentially, um, you know, vehicle testers are able
to remotely test, uh, vehicles, um, but plugging in
and, you know,
I mean, I would say potentially,
but we couldn't say whether that would actually
include whether that's gonna work or not.
Okay. Thank You. It's definitely,
it's definitely a question for the Ministry of Transport.
In, in 2022, they had the long-term insights briefing
that highlighted these issues.
So I believe the undertaking work,
the undertaking work at beginning of this year.
So, um, around the,
and so if I, if I was, um, suggesting something
to the committee, it would be our recommendations three
and five really, um, which three is around, goes
to the point around the regulation
and how it's making sure that the, that they understand the,
the Warren fitness is targeted towards the greatest risks,
um, and they understand the impact of these things.
And then the five, making sure
that the rules can change at the same speed of, um,
as the technology changes, all of which the ministry
and NZTA are, um, on top of
Mm-hmm. Thank you
Guys. Is
just how you mentioned, in order
to regulate the industry, you actually look at the data
or how many wolf being passed and fail.
So how can we know
that those data will receive from NAT are the truly reflect
what's happening on, on the ground?
For example, I think a lot of people will go
to bring their cars there.
Mm-hmm. And, and the, the mechanic will give me a course
of a Carlos, you can't pass the W if you don't change this.
So, and, and,
and I just don't believe
that they actually launch into the dataset I failed my car.
So they, they, things can be already fixed
before it's actually input into the data.
So that will, so is that not the, not the very,
uh, the, the data we collect mm-hmm.
Will not truly be fed what's going on in in real life.
Yes. There is certainly a requirement that, um,
Vic on spec should be recording.
Um, any failures, um, that should be something
that they're putting into the system
and that's something I think they would check.
Um, you know, when they look at the records,
they would see ones that have failed.
They would know, they'd be looking to
see that they have, have failed.
So if you had a a, I guess it's the flip side,
that if the data was showing that a garage had
too high a pass rate, they'd be suggesting that, well,
what's happening to the ones that that failed?
'cause if some garages look like they're passing more cars
than others, that would be suspicious
because you'd expect a certain level, level
of failures to be recorded.
So I think that would be picked up in the
data data that way. Yeah. So,
So this this's what I'm saying,
like the way we collecting the data right now mm-hmm.
The model, we, we collect the data right now,
it can be manipulated by, by the mechanic.
Mm-hmm. So it's,
so data we collect will not be really accurate,
But the data would show if, um,
if they're not recording a failure,
then their pass rate would be too high.
So although the, the failure will be in the system,
the overall, um, pass rates for that inspector
or that garage might look suspiciously high.
They haven't recorded the ones that they've failed.
And so that would potentially pick that up.
So will individual mechanic know
what is too high or too low?
Will they know what's the numbers,
like the percentage too high to low?
Do they know? Because otherwise I can monitor, query my data
to, to fit into that range as well.
I think, you know, that, as I said, it's not a,
not a perfect system, but I think, um, you know, the,
the sorts of analysis that NZTA does will pick up some
of those things because it will pick up missing data.
You know, in terms of if they're manipulating the data, then
that's where it's really down to the,
the owner if they think
that something's not being done properly. Um, yeah.
So, so just now you've mentioned this
is not a perfect system.
So from your point of view, how can we improve that system
so we can truly effect, you know,
the data is truly effect what's going on?
Is it, is there any idea or, or,
I, I think the data is probably, probably the key.
So that, as I said, they do some data analysis at the
moment, what we think they could do is expand on
that data analysis
and that would help if they had, um, improved
and updated IT systems.
But, you know, they use some various measures
that we've talked about, so pass some fail rates
as a few other ones that they use,
but they could cut that data in different ways
and perhaps dig into it in different ways to see
where there are more risks.
Um, you know, what sorts of inspectors
or inspecting organizations perhaps have a higher risk
of non-compliance and look at those in in more detail.
But really, um, you know, when you've got, as you said,
quite a small number of in inspect of people at NZTA
and a big population of vehicle inspectors
and the data's one way that it's quite efficient if you use
that data well of, um, you know,
of picking up where there are problems.
Sure. Just
In terms of the recommendations, um, this,
this report was February, um, so obviously been some, um,
potential for NCTA and MOT to respond.
So what's their, you know, when they've got the report,
what's the feedback they've been that they've given you and,
and what have they done as a response to it?
So, I mean, the response at the time was they were
supportive of the findings.
Um, we haven't talked to them about it since, since then.
Um, but we do have a standard follow up procedure,
so probably within another 12 to 18 months we would go back
to them formally 18 months as a follow up
and ask them about the progress that they've made.
And, um, we'll publish that information. Yeah.
What would you suggest that we, that we should do
with this in terms of following it up?
Because the, 'cause we will obviously go 'cause mm-hmm.
A lot of these things you said, well,
that's actually their business rather than you're Yeah.
You know, you're around their system, um, about
how the system's actually working, um,
and particularly some
of those things about the new technologies, et cetera,
as well as the, as well as the mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. The inspecting the inspector system, um,
and responding to your recommendations.
So what, what would, what would your recommendation
to us be in terms of what we should do?
Yes. I think, as Jason said,
probably the recommendations three and
and five are probably the key ones.
And, you know, there's obviously been a lot of interest
with the committee, um, about the, you know, the challenges
of the technology and,
and changing technology and what that means.
So that might be something you could follow up with
probably the Ministry of Transport on that one of
what progress they're making with that policy work.
So they were due to start, um, well,
they'd already done some, some thinking about it,
but they were due to start working on that this year.
Um, so you could follow up
and see, you know, have they started that and,
and where are they getting to, and they might be able
to answer some of the, um, sort more
specific questions that you've got.
Um, also the interest in data
that might be something you could follow up with NZTA, um,
talk to 'em about, you know, what they are doing.
Um, they might be able to explain in a bit more detail about
how they can pick up some of those issues
that you've, that you've talked about.
And that would also give us any advice around, um,
around the, any, any changes that are,
should be looked at in terms of regulational mm-hmm.
Legislation. Yeah. Okay. Cool.
Um, I'm not sure I had anything else at this stage.
Anybody else got any other,
other questions they wanted to ask?
No. No. Okay. But
otherwise, just say thank you very much for,
for all the work that's obviously gone into this
and it's good to see you.
Yeah. And, um, thank you.
And we will, we will consider how we follow up.
I mean, we may well be that we,
we just put it into the annual review process with, uh, MOT
and NTA specific, anything separate,
but that's not that far away, so.
Yeah. No, we really appreciate it. Thank you. Thanks.